7.2 COMPUTING AND SOCIETY: COMPUTER VIRUSES

In November 1988, Robert Morris, a student at Cornell University, launched a so-called virus
program that infected a significant fractino of computers connected to the Internet (which
was much smaller than it is now.) Morris was sentenced to three years probation, 400 hours of 
community service, and a $10,000 fine.

In order to attack a computer, a vairus has to find a way to get its instructions executed. This
particular program carried out a "buffer overrun" attack, providing an unexpectedly large
input to a program on another machine. That program allocated an array of 512 characters,
under the assumption that nobody would ever provide such a long input. Unfortunately, that
program was writtein in the C programming lanaguage. C, like C++, does not check that an
array is less than the length of the array. If you write into an array using an index that
is too large, you simply overwrite memory locations that belong to some other objects. C
programmers are supposed to provide safety checks, but that had not happened in the
program under attack. The virus program purposefully filled the 512-character array with
536 bytes. The excess 24 bytes overwrote a return address, which the attacker knew was
stored juat after the array. When the function that read the input was finished. It didn't return
to its caller but to code supplied by the virus (see the figure.) The virus was thus able to
execute its code on a remote machine and infect it.

In recent years, computer attacks have intensified and the motives have become more
sinister. Instead of disabling computers, viruses often take permanent residence in the
attacked computers. Criminal enterprieses rent out the processing power of millions of 
hijacked computers for sending spam e-mail. Other viruses monitor every keystroke and
send those that look like credit card numbers or banking passwords to their master, or
encrypt all disk files and demand a monetary ransom payment from the unfortunate user to
unlock the files.

Typically, a machine gets infected because a user executes code downloaded from the
internet, clicking on an icon or link that purposts to lead to something interesting, such as a 
game or video clip. Antivirus programas check all downloaded programs against an ever-growing
list of known viruses.

When you use a computer for managing your finances, you need to be aware of the risk of
infection. If a virus reads your banking password and empties your account, you will have a 
hard time convincing your financial institution that it wasn't your act, and you will most 
likely lose your money. It is a good idea to use banks that require "two-factor authentication"
for major transactions, such as a callback on your cellphone.

Viruses are even used for military purposes. In 2010, a virus dubbed Stuxnet spread through
Microsoft Windows and infected USB sticks. The virus looked for Siemens Industrial
computers and reporgrammed them in subtle ways. It appears that the virus was designed
to damage the centrifuges of the Iranian nuclear enrichment operation. The computers
controlled the centrifuges were not connected to the internet, but they were configured with
USB sticks, some of which were infected. Security researchers believe that the virus was
developed by U.S and ISrerali Intelligence agencies, and that it was successful in slowing
down the Iranian nuclear program. Neither country has officially acknowledged or denied
their role in the attacks.

